---
layout: single
title:  "To build, or not to build, that is the question"
date:   2023-07-31 15:25:41 +0100
categories: PsychoPy
tags: builder coder psychopy
author: Jon
---

This is a somewhat heated debate - we have scientists arguing passionately[^academics] for both sides that users must always write their own code by hand, or that people should use a graphical user interface to write the code for them. Luckily PsychoPy provides both interfaces to both groups can be happy.

Actually, no, on reflection, the notion of the debate from _both_ sides is _rarely_ true. The debate, the argument, nearly always comes from those in favour of hand-writing the code. There seems to be an assumption that the people using the graphical interface are only doing so because they lack the skills or commitment to write their code by hand. This document aims to readdress that balance and consider the genuine scientific advantages that might arise from builder-style interfaces.

It is true that PsychoPy Builder was _originally_ designed as a tool to support non-programmers and, when creating that interface, I (JWP) was still expecting to use hand-written code for all my own studies. That changed. As Builder became more capable, the number of studies that it could cope with grew. The number of studies that warranted the additional hassle[^hassle] of writing code by hand shrank. It's true that there are likely to be some places that code is necessary or useful - a pure no-code solution could not achieve the level of flexibility that code can, or to do so it would have to be just as complex as writing the code yourself - but by providing an interface that accomplishes all the common tasks by graphical components and allows extensions with code where needed we might get the best of both worlds. By around 2015 all of my own studies were being created in PsychoPy Builder, with Code Components added in where needed to achieve the sort of non-standard features in no-code solutions.

Advantages of a Builder interface
  - An abstraction of your experiment design
  - Reusable in the future
  - Best current practice
  - Fewer bugs
  - Speed of authoring

Common arguments for hand-writing code
  - But I like writing my own code
  - I like to know what my code is really doing
  - The code generated by Builder is ugly and convoluted

What about using AI-generated code?


[^academics]: PsychoPy users are mostly academics, after all, and one thing academics do well is hold their viewpoints passionately

[^hassle]: including the initial debugging, the mistakes, the issues that one failed to think about (that would have been handled correctly in the Builer-generated boilerplate code)

## Advantages of a Builder interface



## Common arguments for hand-writing code



## Ultimately

We don't want people to think there's a right and wrong - people are different and should use whatever tool works best for their particular needs.